README.md, before:

## Trace: Machine Learning of Signal Images for Trace-Sensitive Mass Spectrometry

## Introduction

This repository contains the Python code for the manuscript
> Liu, Z., et al. [ Trace: Machine Learning of Signal Images for Trace-Sensitive Mass Spectrometry – A Case Study from Single-Cell Metabolomics.](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b05985) *Anal. Chem*. 2019 91 (9), 5768-5776


Recent developments in high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) technology enabled ultrasensitive detection of biomolecules even at the level of single cells. However, extraction of trace-abundance signals from complex MS datasets requires improved data and signal processing algorithms. To bridge this gap, we here developed *"Trace"*, a software package that incorporates machine learning (ML) to automate feature selection and optimization for the extraction of trace-level signals from MS data. The basic workflow is shown below:
![](doc/workflow.png)


## Setup

### Environment
*Trace* is implemented in Python with `TensorFlow`. For large MS data, we recommend 32+ GB RAM for fast data processing and sufficient data storage capacity. GPU is recommended (but not required) for speeding up the initial training of the model.

To run *Trace*, following software/libraries should be installed:

- [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/)
- [TensorFlow == 1.15](https://www.tensorflow.org/)
- [joblib == 0.11](https://pypi.org/project/joblib/)
- Check `requirements.txt` for all dependencies

Other libraries may also be installed if not existent beforehand. For most of them, `pip install` would work. 

### Pre-trained models
To use *Trace* for signal detection on MS data, a pre-trained model is needed. You can download the pre_trained models here: 
 
 - [pre-trained_models [90M]](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Fc6XwA3wLIaa-3n-syBOAu-tiB_vbQRT/view?usp=sharing) 

and put it under this directory.

While the pre-trained model is provided under default settings for our CE-ESI-MS data, users can also perform independent training for their customized datasets with the code provided. The details of training the model is discussed below.

### Input data format
*Trace* calls on both the centroid and profile MS data to reduce data processing time. Export and convert the MS1 spectra from each raw (primary) MS data file into the open-access `mzML` file format in both centroid and profile mode. Use ProteoWizard to convert these files into `mzML` format and convert profiled `mzML` data into centroided data using peakpicking in `MsConvert`.

## Usage

### Read Raw Files
Read raw files through `mzmlReadRaw.py` and the `init_scan()` function. 
```
import mzmlReadRaw as read
[scan_num, scan_t, mz_list] = read.init_scan(inputfile)
```

### Adjust Parameters
Reference parameter descriptions at: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sFaYOJhUzy4CGAyHIkhhx4Vdc1x7Sx9x/view?usp=sharing
Change any parameter using the params object:
```
from MasterConfig import params
params.anyparam = yourValue
```
### Signal Detection from MS Data 
To process your MS data for signal detection (with all parameters and inputs by default), make sure you already have the pre_trained models (either by downloading the models provided above or training you own model). Then simply run the main code by:

```
python TRACE.py
```



### Results
After running the code, a folder called "`Results`" will be generated (if not existent) and the result files will be saved under that folder. These files will be generated:
Additionally, view the result numpy arrays and dataframes in `TraceResults.py` and the `results` object. Access arrays through:
```
from TraceResults import results
results.initial_peaks
results.final_peaks
results.images_peaks
results.dataFrameInitPeaks 
results.dataFrameFinalPeaks 
```

| Output File &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;  | Description |
| ---- | --- |
| `Initial_pks.csv` | Initial scanning signal list. Contains (m/z, retention time, intensity, peak area, SNR) for each signal. |
| `Images_pks.txt` | Images of the potential signals by initial scaning (60x12=720 pixels for each image per row by default). |
| `Final_pks.csv` | Final signal list. Contains (m/z, retention time, intensity, peak area, SNR) for each signal per row. |
| `Signal Images` | Final signal image heatmap plots contained in a folder. Enable or disable by adjusting the PLOT_IMG parameter in `MasterConfig`. |

### Train Your Own Model 
While the pre-trained model is provided by default with our CE-ESI-MS data, users are advised to perform independent training for customized datasets, particularly if different types of experimental conditions or technologies were used to acquire the data. For this purpose, besides the python code provided (`Training_Model.py`), users need to prepare their own training data: both positive (true) and negative (false) signal sample images (`imgs-train.txt`) and their labels (`label-train.txt`). The image file should be in such a format that each line stands for a flatted signal image (rows connect to a single row in order). The label file should be in one column indicating whether (1) or not (0) the signal image stands for a true signal in the image file of corresponding row. For example, if N (>1000 recommended for better model performance) samples are collected and labeled, then the data size should be (`N x 720`) for image file and (`N x 1 `)for label file. To run the program, execute the `Training_Model.py` code by 

```
python Training_Model.py
```  
For more details about *Trace*, please go to the paper.

Commit message:

Readme update with pip install requirements and results

README.md, after:

## Trace: Machine Learning of Signal Images for Trace-Sensitive Mass Spectrometry

## Introduction

This repository contains the Python code for the manuscript
> Liu, Z., et al. [ Trace: Machine Learning of Signal Images for Trace-Sensitive Mass Spectrometry – A Case Study from Single-Cell Metabolomics.](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b05985) *Anal. Chem*. 2019 91 (9), 5768-5776


Recent developments in high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) technology enabled ultrasensitive detection of biomolecules even at the level of single cells. However, extraction of trace-abundance signals from complex MS datasets requires improved data and signal processing algorithms. To bridge this gap, we here developed *"Trace"*, a software package that incorporates machine learning (ML) to automate feature selection and optimization for the extraction of trace-level signals from MS data. The basic workflow is shown below:
![](doc/workflow.png)


## Setup

### Environment
*Trace* is implemented in Python with `TensorFlow`. For large MS data, we recommend 32+ GB RAM for fast data processing and sufficient data storage capacity. GPU is recommended (but not required) for speeding up the initial training of the model.

To run *Trace*, following software/libraries should be installed:

- Check `requirements.txt` for all dependencies
- CD to the directory where requirements.txt is located
- Activate your virtualenv
- Run this line in your shell
```
pip install -r requirements.txt 
```

Other libraries may also be installed if not existent beforehand. For most of them, `pip install` would work. 

### Pre-trained models
To use *Trace* for signal detection on MS data, a pre-trained model is needed. You can download the pre_trained models here: 
 
 - [pre-trained_models [90M]](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Fc6XwA3wLIaa-3n-syBOAu-tiB_vbQRT/view?usp=sharing) 

and put it under this directory.

While the pre-trained model is provided under default settings for our CE-ESI-MS data, users can also perform independent training for their customized datasets with the code provided. The details of training the model is discussed below.

### Input data format
*Trace* calls on both the centroid and profile MS data to reduce data processing time. Export and convert the MS1 spectra from each raw (primary) MS data file into the open-access `mzML` file format in both centroid and profile mode. Use ProteoWizard to convert these files into `mzML` format and convert profiled `mzML` data into centroided data using peakpicking in `MsConvert`.

## Usage

### Read Raw Files
Read raw files through `mzmlReadRaw.py` and the `init_scan()` function. 
```
import mzmlReadRaw as read
[scan_num, scan_t, mz_list] = read.init_scan(inputfile)
```

### Adjust Parameters
Reference parameter descriptions at: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sFaYOJhUzy4CGAyHIkhhx4Vdc1x7Sx9x/view?usp=sharing
Check `MasterConfig.py` for all variables that are adjustable, such as necessary file paths.
Change any parameter using the params object:
```
from MasterConfig import params
params.anyparam = yourValue
```
### Signal Detection from MS Data 
To process your MS data for signal detection (with all parameters and inputs by default), make sure you already have the pre_trained models (either by downloading the models provided above or training you own model). Then simply run the main code by:

```
python TRACE.py
```



### Results
After running the code, a folder called "`Results`" will be generated (if not existent) and the result files will be saved under that folder. These files will be generated:
Additionally, view the result numpy arrays and dataframes in `TraceResults.py` and the `results` object. Access arrays through:
```
from TraceResults import results
results.initial_peaks
results.final_peaks
results.images_peaks
results.dataFrameInitPeaks 
results.dataFrameFinalPeaks 
```

| Output File &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;  | Description |
| ---- | --- |
| `Initial_pks.csv` | Initial scanning signal list. Contains (m/z, retention time, intensity, peak area, SNR) for each signal. |
| `Images_pks.txt` | Images of the potential signals by initial scaning (60x12=720 pixels for each image per row by default). |
| `Final_pks.csv` | Final signal list. Contains (m/z, retention time, intensity, peak area, SNR) for each signal per row. |
| `Signal Images` | Final signal image heatmap plots contained in a folder. Enable or disable by adjusting the PLOT_IMG parameter in `MasterConfig`. |

### Train Your Own Model 
While the pre-trained model is provided by default with our CE-ESI-MS data, users are advised to perform independent training for customized datasets, particularly if different types of experimental conditions or technologies were used to acquire the data. For this purpose, besides the python code provided (`Training_Model.py`), users need to prepare their own training data: both positive (true) and negative (false) signal sample images (`imgs-train.txt`) and their labels (`label-train.txt`). The image file should be in such a format that each line stands for a flatted signal image (rows connect to a single row in order). The label file should be in one column indicating whether (1) or not (0) the signal image stands for a true signal in the image file of corresponding row. For example, if N (>1000 recommended for better model performance) samples are collected and labeled, then the data size should be (`N x 720`) for image file and (`N x 1 `)for label file. To run the program, execute the `Training_Model.py` code by 

```
python Training_Model.py
```  
For more details about *Trace*, please go to the paper.
